\input texinfo       @c                    -*- Texinfo -*-
@c %**start of header
@setfilename carom.info
@settitle The Carom Library
@c %**end of header

@copying
Copyright @copyright{} 2008 Tavian Barnes
@end copying

@titlepage
@title The Carom Library
@page
@vskip 0pt plus 1filll
@insertcopying
@end titlepage

@contents

@ifnottex
@node Top
@top The Carom Library

@insertcopying
@end ifnottex

@menu
* Introduction:: An introduction to the Carom library.
* Scalars and Vectors:: Unit-enforced scalars and vectors.
* Particles:: Point particles that make up bodies
* Type Index::
* Function Index::
* Concept Index::
@end menu


@node Introduction
@chapter Introduction

@cindex introduction
@cindex overview

The Carom library is a C++ library for high-accuracy numerical physics. It provides high-accuracy integration methods, rigid body dynamics, mesh-based collision detection and response, compile-time unit correctness checking, and arbitrary-precision, machine-independant results. Carom implements original algorithms for numerical integration and collision detection, and relies on the MPFR library for raw, numerical operations.

The high-level class @code{system} represents a (possibly isolated) physical system, and contains one or more bodies. The @code{body} class represents a single body, and is made up of one or more particles. A body has a strict definition in terms of numerical integration. The @code{body} is virtual, and is not particularly useful on its own, as it performs no integration for the motion of its partilcles; derrived classes like @code{simple_body} should be used instead. The @code{particle} class represents a single, point particle, with position, velocity, acceleration, and mass. It too is virtual, to allow particles to have additional properties like charge. For a full explanation of these classes and the related utility classes, it is helpful to work from the ground up, starting with the basic classes for scalars and vectors.

One important thing to note is that everything exposed by the Carom library is in the carom namespace.


@node Scalars and Vectors
@chapter Scalars and Vectors

@cindex units
@cindex scalar
@cindex vector

The Carom library uses TMP (template metaprogramming) to ensure that arithmetic operations are unit-correct at compile-time. The effect on the user is mainly that quantities of different units have different types. The type @code{scalar}, for example, does not represent any possible scalar quantity, like time or distance; rather, it represents a quantity with no units at all, like an angle, or a ratio of two distances.

@menu
* scalar_units and vector_units:: The template classes for general scalars and vectors.
* Useful typedefs:: Hiding awkward template syntax from the user.
* Vector products:: The cross and dot products
* Mathematical functions:: Trig functions, norms, projections, etc.
* Floating-point precision:: Changing the floating-point precision.
* Subverting the unit system:: Bypassing the requirements of the unit-correctness system.
@end menu

@node scalar_units and vector_units
@section scalar_units and vector_units

@tindex scalar_units
@tindex vector_units

The template classes for scalars and vectors of arbitrary units are @code{scalar_units<>} and @code{vector_units<>}, respectively. They are declared as follows:

@verbatim
namespace carom
{
  template <int m, int d, int t>
  class scalar_units;

  template <int m, int d, int t>
  class vector_units;
}
@end verbatim

The template parameters m, d, and t are the exponents on the mass, distance, and time units, respectively. For example, in SI units, the units of a scalar or vector are
@tex
${\it kg}^{m}\,m^{d}\,s^{t}$
@end tex
@ifhtml
<i>kg<sup>m</sup>m<sup>d</sup>s<sup>t</sup></i>
@end ifhtml
@ifnottex
@ifnothtml
@code{kg^m*m^d*s^t}
@end ifnothtml
@end ifnottex
.

The operations supported on scalars and vectors are: comparison, addition, and subtraction of scalars and vectors with the same units, multiplication and division of any two scalars, or of a vector by a scalar, and assignment to a scalar or vector with identical units. When two quantities are multiplied or divided, their parameters m, d, and t are added or subtracted, respectively.

Additionally, there is an implicit conversion from any integer type to a scalar, and a vector constructor taking three arguments which can be either integer types or @code{scalar_unit}s with the same units.

The full definition of the scalar_units class is:

@verbatim
namespace carom
{
  template <int m, int d, int t>
  class scalar_units
  {
  public:
    scalar_units();
    template <typename T>
    scalar_units(T n);
    scalar_units(const scalar_units<m, d, t>& n);
    ~scalar_units();

    template <typename T>
    scalar_units& operator=(T n);

    scalar_units& operator=(const scalar_units<m, d, t>& n);
    scalar_units& operator+=(const scalar_units<m, d, t>& n);
    scalar_units& operator-=(const scalar_units<m, d, t>& n);
    scalar_units& operator*=(const scalar_units<0, 0, 0>& n);
    scalar_units& operator/=(const scalar_units<0, 0, 0>& n);

    template <typename T> T to() const;
  };
}
@end verbatim

The template member function @code{to<>()} returns the scalar converted to any integer or floating-point type.

The full definition of the vector_units class is:

@verbatim
namespace carom
{
  template <int m, int d, int t>
  class vector_units
  {
  public:
    vector_units();
    vector_units(void*); // For constructs like vector v = 0; if (v == 0) { }
    vector_units(const scalar_units<m, d, t>& x,
                 const scalar_units<m, d, t>& y,
                 const scalar_units<m, d, t>& z);
    vector_units(const vector_units<m, d, t>& n);
    ~vector_units();

    vector_units& operator=(const vector_units<m, d, t>& n);
    vector_units& operator+=(const vector_units<m, d, t>& n);
    vector_units& operator-=(const vector_units<m, d, t>& n);
    vector_units& operator*=(const scalar_units<0, 0, 0>& n);
    vector_units& operator/=(const scalar_units<0, 0, 0>& n);

    scalar_units<m, d, t> x();
    scalar_units<m, d, t> y();
    scalar_units<m, d, t> z();
  };
}
@end verbatim

The @code{x()}, @code{y()}, and @code{z()} member functions return the x, y, and
z components of the vector.

The @code{scalar_units<>} and @code{vector_units<>} classes use the MPFR library internally for arbitrary-precision, machine-independant arithmetic. To get or set the precision used by the library call one of the @code{precision()} functions (@pxref{Floating-point precision}).

@node Useful typedefs
@section Useful typedefs

@tindex scalar
@tindex scalar_angle
@tindex scalar_mass
@tindex scalar_distance
@tindex scalar_time
@tindex scalar_speed
@tindex scalar_momentum
@tindex scalar_acceleration
@tindex scalar_force
@tindex scalar_moment_of_inertia
@tindex scalar_angular_speed
@tindex scalar_angular_momentum
@tindex scalar_angular_acceleration
@tindex scalar_torque
@tindex scalar_energy
@tindex scalar_power

@tindex vector
@tindex vector_angle
@tindex vector_displacement
@tindex vector_velocity
@tindex vector_momentum
@tindex vector_acceleration
@tindex vector_force
@tindex vector_angular_velocity
@tindex vector_angular_momentum
@tindex vector_angular_acceleration
@tindex vector_torque

Since declaring @code{vector_units<0, 1, -1> v;} for a velocity variable @code{v} is rather confusing and awkward, Carom provides many useful typedefs for commonly used types. They are: 

@verbatim
namespace carom
{
  typedef scalar_units<0, 0, 0>  scalar;
  typedef scalar_units<0, 0, 0>  scalar_angle;
  typedef scalar_units<1, 0, 0>  scalar_mass;
  typedef scalar_units<0, 1, 0>  scalar_distance;
  typedef scalar_units<0, 0, 1>  scalar_time;
  typedef scalar_units<0, 1, -1> scalar_speed;
  typedef scalar_units<1, 1, -1> scalar_momentum;
  typedef scalar_units<0, 1, -2> scalar_acceleration;
  typedef scalar_units<1, 1, -2> scalar_force;
  typedef scalar_units<1, 2, 0>  scalar_moment_of_inertia;
  typedef scalar_units<0, 0, -1> scalar_angular_speed;
  typedef scalar_units<1, 2, -1> scalar_angular_momentum;
  typedef scalar_units<0, 0, -2> scalar_angular_acceleration;
  typedef scalar_units<1, 2, -2> scalar_torque;
  typedef scalar_units<1, 2, -2> scalar_energy;
  typedef scalar_units<1, 2, -3> scalar_power;

  typedef vector_units<0, 0, 0>  vector;
  typedef vector_units<0, 0, 0>  vector_angle;
  typedef vector_units<0, 1, 0>  vector_displacement;
  typedef vector_units<0, 1, -1> vector_velocity;
  typedef vector_units<1, 1, -1> vector_momentum;
  typedef vector_units<0, 1, -2> vector_acceleration;
  typedef vector_units<1, 1, -2> vector_force;
  typedef vector_units<0, 0, -1> vector_angular_velocity;
  typedef vector_units<1, 2, -1> vector_angular_momentum;
  typedef vector_units<0, 0, -2> vector_angular_acceleration;
  typedef vector_units<1, 2, -2> vector_torque;
}
@end verbatim

@node Vector products
@section Vector products

@findex dot
@findex cross

The dot and cross products of two vectors are implemented as functions, whose declarations look like this:

@verbatim
namespace carom
{
  template <int m1, int d1, int t1, int m2, int d2, int t2>
  scalar_units<m1 + m2, d1 + d2, t1 + t2>
  dot(const vector_units<m1, d1, t1>& lhs,
      const vector_units<m2, d2, t2>& rhs);

  template <int m1, int d1, int t1, int m2, int d2, int t2>
  vector_units<m1 + m2, d1 + d2, t1 + t2>
  cross(const vector_units<m1, d1, t1>& lhs,
        const vector_units<m2, d2, t2>& rhs);
}
@end verbatim

@node Mathematical functions
@section Mathematical functions

@findex pi
@findex abs
@findex sqrt
@findex sin
@findex cos
@findex tan
@findex atan2
@findex pow

Carom provides many needed mathematical functions for dealing with scalars. So far, they are:

@verbatim
namespace carom
{
  scalar_angle pi   ();
  scalar1      abs  (const scalar1& n);
  (scalar1)/2  sqrt (const scalar1& n);
  scalar       sin  (const scalar_angle& n);
  scalar       cos  (const scalar_angle& n);
  scalar       tan  (const scalar_angle& n);
  scalar_angle atan2(const scalar1& x, const scalar1& y);
  scalar       pow  (const scalar& base, const scalar& exp);
}
@end verbatim

These functions are actually template functions, but for brevity and clarity, we have eliminated the @code{template <...>} declarations. @code{scalar1} and @code{scalar2} represent scalars of arbitrary units, and operations on these identifiers, such as @code{scalar1+scalar2} or @code{(scalar1)/2} signify doing that operation to the parameters m, d, and t. @code{scalar1+scalar2} thus means @code{scalar_units<m1+m2, d1+d2, t1+t2>}, and @code{(scalar1)/2} thus @code{scalar_units<m1/2, d1/2, t1/2>}. @code{scalar} istelf simply means the aforementioned typedef for @code{scalar_units<0, 0, 0>}.

@findex norm
@findex normalized
@findex proj

Additionally, Carom provides utility functions for vectors. As yet, these are:

@verbatim
namespace carom
{
  scalar1 norm      (const vector1& n);
  vector  normalized(const vector1& n);
  vector2 proj      (const vector1& u, const vector2& d);
}
@end verbatim

@code{proj} returns the projection on @code{u} of @code{d}.

@node Floating-point precision
@section Floating-point precision

@findex precision

The default floating-point precision for scalars and vectors is 53 bits. To get or set the floating-point precision, in bits, used by Carom for scalars and vectors, use the @code{precision()} functions. Setting the precision changes the precision of all scalars and vectors that are constructed, or assigned to, after the call. These functions are declared like so:

@verbatim
namespace carom
{
  unsigned long precision();
  void          precision(unsigned long prec);
}
@end verbatim

@node Subverting the unit system
@section Subverting the unit system

@findex convert

Though the unit-safety system is generally a convienence, we sometimes need to subvert it. For instance, we may want an angular velocity of 2*pi. @code{scalar_angular_speed w = 2*pi();} produces an error, even though this is really our desired effect. To subvert the unit-correctness system, a utility function, @code{convert<>}, is supplied. Its declaration looks like this:

@verbatim
namespace carom
{
  template <int m1, int d1, int t1, int m2, int d2, int t2>
  scalar_units<m1, d1, t1> convert(const scalar_units<m2, d2, t2>& n);

  template <int m1, int d1, int t1, int m2, int d2, int t2>
  vector_units<m1, d1, t1> convert(const vector_units<m2, d2, t2>& n);

  template <typename T, int m, int d, int t>
  T convert(const scalar_units<m, d, t>& n);

  template <typename T, int m, int d, int t>
  T convert(const vector_units<m, d, t>& n);
}
@end verbatim

Not all template parameters need to be supplied when @code{convert<>()} is called. To solve the previous problem, we could write @code{scalar_angular_speed w = convert<scalar_angular_speed>(2*pi());} or @code{scalar_angular_speed w = convert<0, 0, -1>(2*pi());}.


@node Particles
@chapter Particles


@node Type Index
@unnumbered Type Index

@printindex tp


@node Function Index
@unnumbered Function Index

@printindex fn


@node Concept Index
@unnumbered Concept Index

@printindex cp

@bye
